DOCUMENT RESUME
ED 061 103
AUTHOR
TITLE

PUB DATE
NOTE

EDRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS

IDENTIFIERS

SE 013 582

Rowe, Mary Budd
Wait-Time and Rewards as Instructional Variables:
Their Influence on Language, Logic, and Fate
Control.
Apr 72
32p.; Presented at the National Association for
Research in Science Teaching, Chicago, Illinois,
April 1972
MF-$0.65 HC-$3.29
Educational Research; Ele entary School Scie ce:
*Instruction; Interaction Process Analysis;
*Questioning Techniques; *Research Reviews
(Publications) ; Student Characteristics; Teacher
Characteristics
NARST

ABSTRACT
Elementary science teachers allow an average of one
second for a response to a question, and follow a student response by
a comment within an average of nine-tenths of a second. When these
two "wait times" are extended to three to five seconds, a number of
changes occur in student variables. There are increases in the length
of the response, the number of unsolicited appropriate responses,
student confidence, incidence of speculative responses, incidence of
child-child data comparisons, incidence of evidence-inference
statements, frequency of student questions, and incidence of
responses from "relatively slow" students. The number of teacher
questions which do not elicit a response decreases. Teacher
characteristics change as wait-times increase. There is an increased
flexibility of teacher responses, the questioning pattern becomes
more variable, teacher expectations for performance of students rated
as "slow" may change. These generalizations are based upon five years
of study of video-taped lessons or micro-teaching sessions. These
studies also suggest some research hypotheses concerning the effect
of verbal reward and wait-time on students' perceptions of their
degree of environmental control: low incidence of verbal reward and a
long wait-time may reduce fatalism. (Author/AL)

ABSTRACT
TITLE:

WAIT-TIME AND REWARDS AS INSTRUCTIONAL VARIABTRS:
ON LANGUAGE, LOGIC, AND FATE CONTROL.

AUTHOR:
ADDRESS

Mary Budd Rowe
Teachers College
Columbia University
New York City, New York
(212)

THEIR INFLUENCE

10027

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEA
EPUCATION & WELFAR
OFFICE OF EDUCATION
THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN
DUCFD EXACTLY AS RECEiVEr
THE PERSON OR ORGANIZATIOI
INATINO IT POINTS OF VIEW 0
IONS STATED DO NOT NECES
REPRESENT OFFICIAL OFFICE C
CATION POSITION OR POLICY

870 - 4042

MEETING:

National Association for Research in Science Teaching
1972
April

ABSTRACT:

The paper summarizes work of five years on influence of a
variable called teacher wait-time on development of language
and logic in children taking part in elementary science
programs. Analysis of over 300 tape recordings showed mean
wait-time to be on the order of one second. After a teacher
asks a question students must begin a response within an
average time of one second. If they do not the teacher
repeats, rephrases or asks a different question or calls
on others. A second potential wait-time is involved. When
a student makes a response, the teacher reacts or asks
another question within an average time of 0.9 seconds.
When mean wait-times of three to five seconds are achieved
through training, analysis of more than 900 tapes shows
changed values on nine student variables: 1. The length
of responses increases. 2. The number of unsolicited but
appropriate responses increases. 3. Failures to respond
decrease. 4. Confidence as reflected in decrease of
Incidence of speculative
inflected responses increases. 5.
responses increases. 6. Incidence of child-child
Incidence of evidence7.
ccmparisons of data increases.
inference statements increases. 8. The frequency of
Incidence of responses
9.
student questions increases.
from students rated by teachers as relatively slow increases.
Servo-chart plots of recordings show that students discussing
science phenomena tend to speak in bursts with intervals of
three to five seconds between bursts being fairly common.
The average post-student response wait-time of 0.9 seconds
apparently intervenes between bursts to prevent completion
of a thought.
Over time a classroom on the prolonged wiat-time schedule
takes on other properties. Three teacher variables change:
Response flexibility scores increase: 2. Teacher
1.
questioning pattern becomes more variable: 3. There is
some indication that teacher expectations for performance
of students rated as relatively slow improves.
A model which involves the relation of wait-time and reward
as input variables to language, logic, and fate control as
complex outcome variables is discussed.

1

WAIT-TIME AND REWARDS AS INSTRUCTIONAL VARIABLES,
THEIR INFLUENCE ON LANGUAGE, LOGIC, AND FATE CONTROL'
bY

Eary Budd Rowe
Teachers College, Columbia University
New York, New York

"The paradigm observer is not the man
who sees and reports what all normal
observers see and report, but the man
who sees in familiar objects what no
one else has seen before."
-Norwood Russell Hanson
in Patterns of Discovery
Introduction

All of the major elementary science programs extant today were designed
to provoke children to inquire about relationships among natural phenomena.
All of them provide situations meant to be suitable for the development in
children of certain skills and a viable knowledge structure. In spite of
provocative stimuli, the people who prepared the programs had to admit that
the amount and quality of inquiny actually occurring fell uell below expectations. While some people connected with the projects blamed the situation
on the teachers' lack of science knowledge, certain observations made by me
and those working in my group made us think that this generally held explanation was too superficial. The evidence we had: though fragmentary, did not
support that view.
We found, for example, that children taught by teachers with considerable
training in one of the programs did not exhibit substanially different rates
of inquiry from those taught by teachers with less exposure to the programs.
Neither were we able to distinguish different patterns of inquiry in one program as compared with another. With a few marked exceptions which will be
discussed shortly, the quality of discourse tended to stay,at elow level and
the pattern of interchange between teachers and children still more slosely
resembled an inquisition than a joint investigation or a reasonable conversation.
That we could further discount the "lack of knowledge" argument as a
primary factor seemed to be demonstrated in data from two conferences funded
by the National Science Foundation in which we had the opportunity to compare
the instruction of children as carried out by a total of 54 scientists and.

/Work described in this paper is being supported by grants from the Alcoa
Foundation, International Nickel Company of Canada, Shell Companies Foundation,
The Xerox Corporation, The Mary Duke Biddle Foundation, and the Hebrew
Technical Institute.
In addition, a post-doctoral appointment at New York University had
permitted the author to spend more time on investigations than would be possible
when carrying a normal professional load. The appointment was funded through
the United States Office of Education.

2

science ed cators with instruction as conducted by a sample of classroom
teachers. It was clear that some factors other than knowledge differences
must be at work because the patterns of questions and responses were remarkably
alike. To make that determination, we conceptualized the classroom as a twoplayer system consisting of a teacher and the collection of students (treated
as the other player). Teachers had four kinds of verbal moves available to
them--structuring, soliciting, responding, and reacting or evaluating. In
theory, students engaging in inquiry would have the same set of moves available
,to them. By simply categorizing the sequence of moves and plotting them
approximately on a time line, the patterns of interaction could be clearly
displayed. Figure I, for example, ahows what the "inquisition" looks like.
It is characterized by a rapid question-answer sequence with the solicitation
coming usually from the teacher. Figure II, on the other hand, shows what an
inquiry pattern or a conversational pattern looks like. In addition, we found
that whatever pattern the teacher exhibited when working with four children
closely resembled the pattern displayed when carrying on a discussion with a
whole class of children.
The fact that the appearacne of one or two graphs made from recordings
of micro-teaching sessions mirrored the form found for each teacher when working with a whole class suggested that size of groups could not be a major
factor in determining whether an inquiry pattern would or would not develop.
Thus we are left with none of the usual remedies for improving inquiry. We
could not blame its low incidence on lack of materials, or on lack of knowledge
on program or on group size, at least net within rather broad limits.
Wait-Time

After visiting and recording examples of science instruction carried
out in classrooms located in suburban, urban, and rural areas, it finally became clear that while different curricula served as the vehicle of instruction,
almost all of the discourse had one stable property. With the exeption of a
few individuals (three in two hundred recordings) the pace of instruction
was very fast. Teachers allcwedchildren an average time of only one second
to start an answer to a question. If children did not begin a reply within
one second, teachers usually either repeated the questions or called on others
to respond. When children did respond, teachers usually waited slightly less
than a second (average of 0.9 seconds) before commenting on the response,
asking another questions or moving to a new topic.
In the few classrooms where inquiry was going on, the discourse was
marked by the appearance in the speech of the children of speculation, conversational sequences, alternative explanations, and arguments over the interpretation of data. Such classrooms differed from the others in one respect;
the average wait-times seemed to be slightly in excess of three seconds. It
appeared that more of the desired inquiry behaviors occurred in classrooms
where teachers had longer wait-times.
One other observation connected with wait-time caught our attention.
We asked teachers to tell us who, in their judgements, were their five best
and five worst students. When we examined the amount of wait-time given on
the average, to each group we found that the top five get nearly two seconds
to answer while the bottom five get slightly less than one second (0.9 seconds).
This last small piece of inquiry alerted us to another variable, reward
frequency, to which we had given no attention. The amount of sanctioning
behavior directed toward the two groups differed. The bottom-ranked children

3

3

actually received more overt verbal praise than the top-ranked children but
it was difficult to know with certainty what was being rewarded. The top
groups received relatively less evaluative comment from their teachers but
the rewards were usually more pertinent to the responses made by the children.
The bottom groups gathered both more praise as well as more negative comment
but its intent was far more ambiguous. It seemed that teachers rewarded the
top groups for correct responses but they rewarded the bottom groups for both
correct and incorrect responses. Presumably the intent of some of this reward
behavior must be to encourage participation.

We guessed that a clear teacher expectation pattern develops early in
the history of each classroom. Differences in the wait-time and reward patterns
administed to children ranked at the top as compared with those at the bottom
suggest that teachers unconsciously act in such a way as to confirm their
expectations.
So we came to focus our attention on two imput variables, wait-time and
reward. This paper will focus on wait-time but it will be necessary to comment briefly on the possible effect of sanctions so the reader will understand why this variable had to be brought some what under control.

Reward
Exploration and inquiry require students to put together ideas in new
ways, to try out new thoughts, to take risks. For that they not only need
time but they need a sense of being safe. Sanctioning behavior, no matter
how well intended, carries with it an implicit message: "Big brother will
Judgement by an external source which often
get you if you dontt watch out."
behaves whimsically in the view of children cramps investigation.
To grow a scientific think SYSTEM takes time end a great deal of shared
experience, free of the notion of cheating and the fear of teacher reprisal
in the form of verbal pats or paddles. It is in talking about what we have
done and observed and in arguing about what we make of our experiences that
ideas multiply, become refined and finally eventuate in new questions and
experiments. It is in preserving for ourselves the right to be wrong that
we gain courage to try out new ideas, to explore more alternatives, to
objectively evaluate our own work as well as that of others. The new science
programs depend heavily on an intrinsic rather than an extrinsic motivation
model. Conceptual conflict is meant to drive inquiry along just as it does
in the scientific enterprise.
Ere begin to suspect then that at least when we wanted children to engage
in problem solving behavior, in contrast to skill acquisition, wait-times
High rates of rewardshould be high and reward schedules should be reduced.
ing would undermine confidence and act as distractors. In addition, it
might encourage premature termination of search, a disposition to choose
the first alternative that comes to mind. Certainly it would discourrAle
sharing of ideas between students since then someone else could walk off with
praise for a performance first carried out by another child.

4

Simulation Studies

In an attempt to understand something of the effects of reward and
wait-time on problem solving behavior of students, two simulation studies
were undertaken. In connection with our interest in reward, F.X. Lawlor
gave a problem solving task to children under circumstances that simulated
reward patterns common in classroomsaCWe group of children received overt
verbal rewards on a random schedule. The random schedule comes closest to
matching what had been observed to occur in classrooms. A second group of
children received reward for correct responses, the pertinent reward condition.
A third group of children received no overt verbal rewards as they worked.
Lawlor found the problem solving efficiency of the group which received the
ambiguous reward treatment to be significantly below the performance of the
other two groups. Boys prospered in the no reward condition while girls
fared slightly better on the pertinent reward condition. Lawlor's work lent
impetus to our earlier supposition that in problem solving situations or inquiry situations, reward may function to distract students from the task.
L. Ogunyemi carried out another simulation which had as its intent an
attempt to learn something about the function of listening in discussions of
simple physical phenomena. (2) Students brought up under a fast wait-time
schedule coupled with an ambiguous reward schedule probably do not get much
from listening to each other. They are trained to hear the te9cher, if they
hear anything. When students are asked to report what they cbserve, as is
the case in classroom discussions about science phenomena, those who actually
do the talking may get some reinforcement. Does discussion benefit them or
the rest of the class members?
Ogunyemi exposed individual students to a matrix problem that involved
the use of colored dowels of different dimensions. One treatment group
examined the matrix but did no talking about it. In addition to whatever
they observed on their own they heard a tape recording of other students
talking about their observations. Another treatment group , after observing
the matrix, heard a teacher and students discuss it. Members of the third
treatment group were encouraged to state all their observations. All three
were then given a set of tasks to do involving the matrix. Ogunyemi thought
that the opportunity to verbalize might improve the scores of students but
he did not find that to be the case. What he did find was what we had suspected, namely, that stndentswitha history of fast wait-time instruction
tended to ignore information supplied by other students. (Tape recordings
had previously been made in classrooms from which Ogunyemi's subjects came.)
Again males responded womwhat differently from females. The females apparently listened tothe teacher talk but not to the talk of other students.
Males paid no attention to any source of verbalized information, if performance
on the test tasks is taken as the indicator.
Circumstantial evidence leads to the inference that conversation in
which students build on each other's ideas cannot develop in classrooms
operated on a fast wait-time schedule.

5

Servo-chart Plots Show Several
Species of Wait-Times
In micro-teaching situations we began to examine what happened when
Since our earlier work showed
wait-times were experimentally manipulated.
that a group of four or more students makes a satisfactory model of the
speech patterns to be expected of whole classes, this convenient approximation of the classroom discourse allowed us to gather a great deal of data
fairly rapidly. Analysis of audio-and video-tapes immediately presented
another problem to us. It became clear that our estimates of wait-time
were too high. By the time the stopwatch was punched the discourse had
moved on. We needed to find another way to measure wait-time that would
not be hampered by the fact that motor responses (those necessary to
actuate the clock) are very slow in comparison to mental responses.
This problem was partially solved by delivering the sound into a
serve-chart plotter. With a rectifier inserted between the tape recorder
and the plotter, the needle could be made to track horizontally when there
By running the
were silences. The paper for the plotter is calibrated.
the plotter as fast as it will go, each calibration comes to represent one
second. As Figure III shows, the incidence of pauses as long as one second
in a classroom where the teacher is not alerted to wait-time is very small.
The height of the peaks simply indicates the amplitude of sound generated.
One other interesting aspectof the plots is worth noting before going on.
Children generate speech at a slower rate, on the average, than teachers do.
This will be reflected in the plots by the width of the curves somewhat
below the peaks.
Close examination of the servo-chart plots explains to some degree the
dynamics involved in some of the outcome variables described below.

6

Species of Wait-Time
a.

The two-player model:

(See figures

and

Instruction was conceptualized as a game in which there are two
players. The teacher is one player and the set of students constitutes
the other player. Four kinds of moves are available to each player.
1.

Structuring in which a player gives directions, states
procedures, suggests changes. e.g., "Let's put the
thermometer in the ice water.
.g., "Why

2.

Soliciting in which a player asks a question.
do you thing that happened?"

3.

Responding in which a player answers a solicitation or
responds to a structuring suggestion or builds on the
(e.g., "When I
response of another player or reports data.
down
to 4 degrees.")
put the thermometer in ice water it went

4.

5.

Reacting in which a player evaluates statements made by other
(e.g.,
players. It includes verbal rewards and punishments.
etc.)
as
well
as
"good," "fine," "OK," "that is not right,"
because
the
appraisal (That doesn't work the way you said
light is on.").
Wait-time locations - Examination of servo-chart plots show
that wait-times during discussions may occur in the following
locations:
After a teacher move.
a.
After a student move
b.
In the body of a student move
c.

Student talk, especially attempts at explanations, frequently
comes in a series of bursts separated by pauses that often equal
or exceed three seconds.
Figures 3a and _b_show the locations of the potential pauses
in a sequence.
Figure III shows one example of a servo-chart plot typical of
hundreds of tape-recordings where wait-times are short, i.e.
under three seconds.
Species are on the order of one to two seconds or less. All the
interactions go on very rapidly. Student responses tend to be short,
It turns out that when students
averaging 6 to 10 words, and fragmented.
are allowed to speak to each other, as they do in a labOatory setting, or
as they do when there si sufficient wait-time of species #2, allowed by the
teacher, or as we have allowed it under experimental conditions, their
speech tends to come in bursts. That is, any given child will put out an
idea and in the body of his discourse there will be pauses which are often
(See figure
well in excess of one second, more like three to five seconds.
phrase-like
rather
IV) Apparently the reason for the high incidence of
with
short
average
waitthan propositionalresponding that marks classrooms
the
teacher
between
the
times is brought about by the intervention of
Examination of data from the chart plots caused a shift in
speech bursts.

7

7

our focus to the second wait-time the post-student response wait. Prior
to the use of the servo-chart plotter we had paid most attention to the
first species of wait-time, the amount of time teachers gave to students to
begin an answer. The chart plots showed us that the second wait-time, the
one which is potentially available after a student response, might account
for even more variance in the outcome variables. If the teacher "held on"
after a speech burst, then the incidence of extended explanation and the
occurrence of alternative interpretations tended to increase. Figure rv,
shows what typical speech bursts look like when delivered by a student
trying to explain something he experienced with his science materials if
he is left uninterupted. Mapping experience into language is an arduous
process. Cutting off those pauses probably discourages expression and
practice of propositional thought.
When a teacher first begins to experiment with wait-time species 2,
The teacher tends to
post student response is difficult to influence.
react very quickly and so do students. Students call out answers. There
are few examples of what might be called a discussion (conversation) in
which students respond to ideas introduced by other students. (See the
discussion on training techniques.) After a time, however, this pattern
Figure V should
gradually changes and the between-student pauses increase.
be contrasted with Figure III. It illustrates both the change in species 2
pauses and the increase in the length of student statements. (See Appendix
A for a sample of transcript which illustrates the conversational rather
than the inquisitional mode.)
Student and Teacher Outcome Variables
In the series of investigations to be described below the following
outcome variables became the focus of attention.
a.

Student Outcome Variablim
1.

The length of student responses increased. Under a fast
schedule, responses tend to consist of short phrases and
rarely exhibit explanation of any complexity. Data from
the chart plots suggest that the second wait-time, when it
is prolonged, contributes measurably to the appearance of
longer statements.

2.

The number of unsolicited but a.proariate student responses
ncreases. This outcome is more responsive to the second
hen the first wait-time, but is influenced by both.
Failures to ressond decreased.

"1 don't know" or no responses

were often as high as 3 normal classrooms, i.e., in
classrooms where the mean wait-time fell at one second or less.
This outcome is more susceptible to manipulation by the first
wait-time, the pause which the teacher allows before calling
on anot.iler student or repeating the question.
(It also
happens to be responsive to reward incidence.)

8

b.

4

Confidence as reflected in fewer inflected responses increased.
Under a fast schedule, responses tend to be phrased as though
the child were saying, "Is that what you want/" In the middle
of a prolonged fast sequence you can ask a child his name and
it will not be unusual to have him respond with a question mark
in his tone. This confidence indicator, inflected responding,
is also susceptible to the reward variable. As reward increases
so does the incidence of inflected responses.

5.

The incidence cf speculative thinking increased.
influenced by both classes of wait-times.

6.

Teacher-centered show and tell decreases and student-student
comparing Increases. Under a fast schedule and a high reward
or sanctioning schedule, children "stack up" waiting to tell the
teacher. There is very little indication that they listen to
each other. This variable will not be examined in detail in
this paper since it seems to be influenced as much by the
reward pattern as by the pacing.

7.

More evidence followed by or preceded by inference statements
occurred. Under a fast schedule, the incidence of qualified
inferences is extremely low. When the second wait-time is
lengthened this outcome variable changes in a desired direction.

8.

The number of questions asked by children increased and the
number of experiments they proposed increased. It is a well
established fact from classroom interaction studies that
students do not ask questions very often. When they do, the
questions are usually for clarification of procedures and
are rarely ever directed at other students. This outcome
variable seems to be susceptible to both classes of wait-times.

9.

"Slow" student c ntributions increased. Under a fast schinidle
most responses came from a particular faction of the class.
When wait-times were increased, the sources of response
became more varied. Interestingly, this outcome gradually
(Although we
(apparently) influences teacher expectations.
have not had time to investigate it in any detail yet, it
seems to be both surprising and rewarding to the teachers
that students who do not usuallY respond as readily begin to
do so.

This is

Teacher Outcome Variables
Once wait-time is changed and the behavior is stabilized for
a period, certain characteristics of teacher input variables change.
They are regarded here as outcome variables because they are influenced by the wait-time factor.

9
1.

Teachers exhibit greater reseonse flexibility as indicated by the
occurrence of fewer discourse errors. Under a rapid schedule, the
normal situation obtaining in classrooms, the probability that a
detectable discontinuit- in the discourse occurs increases.
Conversation does not build into structural propositions. Instead
the sequence of discourse resembles a smorgasbord line in which
everyone goes along commenting on what he passes and picks up but
nobody pays any attention to or gives any indication that he has
heard the comments of others. If a teaching machine asks a
question and a student responds wial something that is not in
storage, the machine either goes on to the next question as though
nothing happened or it cycles back and repeats, sometimes with
progressive cuing. In either case a "discontinuity" is scored
against the discourse. Our tapes suggest that frequently the
teacher on a fast schedule achieves a less favorable flexibility
score than does a moderately good computer program. At least the
computer program has the advantage of leaving the response time
up to the student. The flexibility score increases with increases
in wait-times. It is computed by simply counting the mismatches
between a student statement and a teacher response or reaction.
See appendix A for an example of discourse in which there are
mismatches.)
Number and kind of teacher questions changes.
a.

The total number of questions decreases per a fifteen minute
Prior to wait-time training it Was not usual to
interval.
find as many as seven to ten questions asked by the teacher
per minute: The mean number of questions averages between
(Inner city rates tend to be
two and three per minute.
slightly higher than suburban rates. Samples of tape
recordings made in the Cumberland Mountains, in Louisiana
and in North Carollne show mean rates of 2.2 questions per
minute.) As wait-times increase the rate of questikaing
For teachers who have achieved criterion wait-times
drops.
of three seconds or longer mean question rates tend to
approach 0.4 per minute. This follows from the fact that
student responses become longer; unsolicited student responses
increase; there are more pauses between speakers as well as
within the speech of speakers.
The net variability in teacher questions increases as
teachers achieve criterion wait-times of three seconds.
Figure V. shws how the pattern of questions changed for
a sample of 74 teachers who achieved criterion wait-times
of three seconds or longer.

Teacher expectations for erformance of certain children seem to
change. In micro-teaching situations, we grouped children whom
teachers did not know into pairs consisting of two children rated
by their school as high verbal or two rated as low verbal or we
paired one high with one low verbal. We told the teachers they had
one of these combinations and the task was to do some science and
employ a longer wait-time; then they were to judge with which kind
of combination of children they were working. At the end of 20
minutes they made their judgements. They tended to make the

10

following kinds of errors:
a.

c.

They rated a high and low combination as two highs;
They tended bo rate two highs correctly most of the time
but occasionally rated them as a high and a low;
Two high verbals were occasionally (about 15% of the time
evaluated as a high and a low.

The fact that 26 teachers who identified their five best and five
poorest students gave the best students more time to reply to questions
leads one to suspect that the relationship of wait-time to expectations
should be investigated in more detail. At the moment all we have
accumulated over the last five years are unsolicited comments from teachers
on longer wait-time schedules that members of the bottom group perform in
new and surprising ways. That teachers may modify expectations gradually
is indicated by comments about a student such as, "He has not done anything
like that before. Maybe he has a special aptitude for science." It may
be useful to study the influence of wait-time and rewards on teacher
expectations in a more systematic way. We have not had an opprotunity,
however, to discover whether the effect on expectations is general or how
long it persists. Neither do we know how it may change the real performance of the students rated at the bottom of the class, gtven that the
pattern of responding could be sustained.

Types of Wait-Time Investigations Pursued.

Over the last six years the investigations of wait-time have been
quite varied in form as befits applied research where the primary goal
is producing desirable outcomes in operating systems.
In vitro studies - The variable was identified first through regular
observations of 36 primary grade classrooms in six snhools in which the
Science Curriculum Improvement Study (SCIS) was being taught. Six (+) 4-ape
recordings were made in each of the rooms during the years. (A total of
103 tapes) Once the fact of short wait-times, high question frequency and
rewards was recognized it became a metter of interest to determine how
general the phenomenon was.
It could be the case, after all, that some.thing
about SCIS prompted the inquisitional pattern or that the pattern was
unique to primary grades or that speech in the region of the six schools
(New York and New Jersey) was always fast-paced.
In the following year
we collected 84 tapes made in classrooms scattered around the country
where SCIS as well as other science curricula were being taught. Wait-times
typically fel) below three seconds. A sample of 34 tapes made of fourth
grade classrooms showed mean wait-times to 1.3 seconds and only one outcome
variable to be significantly different. The mean length of student responses
was 14 rather than 8 words. Thus it seemed safe to infer that short waittimes were not localized in forst and second grade classrooms. In addition
there are accumulated a miscellaneous collection of tapes sent by teachers
who have begun to experiment on their own with the wait-time veriable. In
recent years tapes of fourth, fifth and a few high school groups show mean

11

11

wait-time- to be well under 3 seconds, ranging from 1 second to 2.8
seconds.
Micro-studie - In order to study the influence of prolonged waittimes which did not seem to be occurring with sufficient frequency in natural
settings a series of micro-studies was begun. These took two forms:
a.

The staff worked with small groups of students, finally
settling on four as producing a reasonable facsimile of
a classroom. Here the effort was to increase wait-times
and to study the effect on the outcome variables described
Students
earlier. Both audio and video tapes were used.
came from different grade levels and the lessons were
selected from various curricula. Here the effort was to
attempt to identify the relative influence of the two
species of wait-time, the pause occurring after a
solicitation and the pause following a student response. ,
We attempted to manipulate these independently. Thus the
same lesson would be taught to different groups of children
but the sequence of treatments would be as follows.
Treatment I
Treatment II
Treatment III
Treatment IV

b.

Standard Wait-times
Wait-time #1 long, #2 short
Wait-time #1 short, #2 long
Both wait-times long

A pool of six lessons were prepared. 96 teachers engaged in
a series of teach-twice cycles designed to get them to
produce criterion wait-times of three secondo. They each
taught the same four students in each cycle.

In order to minimize the i fluence of sequence of lessons, the six
lessons were grouped into three sequences. One third of the group did
each sequence. This decision would make it safer to infer that differences
on the outcome variables, if there were any, could be attributed to the
influence of the wait-time changes. The treatment sequence went as follows:
Base line tape. No instruction on wait-times prior to taping.
Play back discussion of wait-time. Portions of the tape
transcribed by the teacher.
b.

Tape 2. Wait-times and outcome variables discussed.
Portions of the tape transcribed by the teacher

c.

Tape 3. Analyzed and techniques for getti g control of the
See training suggestions
post-student wait-time discussed.
described later.)

e.

1222_21.

Analyzed in the same way.

Tape 5.

Analyzed in the same way.

12
f.

Tape 6.

Analyzed.

All tapes were transcribed, coded. Wait-times were measured, the
outcome variables identified and their values determined.
Twelve teachers with criterion waitReturn to the classroom times in the teach-twice cycles were studied and given help in the
classroom. For a period of one year observations and tape recordings
were made at approximately two week intervals (once a week for the
In addition four
first four weeks and then at longer intervals).
other teachers elected to study the influence of wai;-time in their
own classes and to supply us with tapes and transcripts. A total of
74 tapes were accumulated in this phase.
Analyzing Transcripts
Figure VII a and b show a typical analysis of a transcript. In
addition, the questions woald be categorized according to two systems,
one modified from Ashner and Gallagher (3) and the system developed by
T.W. Parsons (4). The primary objective was not to study questioning per se,
namely as an input variable, but rather to study teacher questions as an
outcome variable. We were asking whether the pattern of question asking
spontaneously changes as a result of increases in wait-time.
The Aschner and Gallagher categories were five in number:
1.

Routine questions concerning procedures and structuring of
discussion.

2.

Cognitive memory questions

3.

Convergent questions requiring the analysis and integration
of given or remembered data.

4.

Evaluative questions.

5.

Divergent questions.

The Parsons' categories used were the following:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Rhetorical questions
Information questions
Leading questions
Probing questions

The latter categories proved more useful since they could be identified
more easily by teachers and coding required less interpretation of intent.
to 84%. For
(Intercoder agreement for Ashner and Gallagher varied from 7
Parsons system agreement varied from 76% to 94%.)

13

13

-13-

Computation of Mean Wait7Time

As Figures 3a and b show' pauses can occur in three locations. Waittimes for each of these locations were recorded separately. The sum of
seconds for each species of pause was divided hy the total number of occurrences
for that species. This has the effect ofwaighting each category according
to its frequency of occurrence. The overall mean wait-time was then computed
from these means.
The studies summarized in this paper as well as the one reported by
Garigliano show mean wait-times prior to training to be on the order of one
to two seconds. Garigliano did not succeed in getting any of the people in
his training group to criterion of three seconds or longer. However, his
work verifies that most of the outcome variables are as described for waittimes which are short.
Values of the outcome variables begin to shift in a favorable direction
once mean wait-times equal or exceed three seconds. (See, for example, Table
Classes which are maintained on criterion for prolonged periods gradually
I )
change in a number of characteristics. Figure VIII shows the kinds of shifts
typical of the 12 classes for which recordings were made over a period of 18
to 21 weeks. It should be noted, however, that in the second or third week
there is a tendency for teachers to regress on wait-time. Apparently a
gradual 'role shift occurs for both teachers and students. During this adjustment stage teachers will complain that they can no longer decide when to
intervene. Once through this period, however, criterion times are generally
sustained. Figure IX illustrates the set of inter-dependent relationships
which seem to be involved. This model requires considerably more long term
investigation. At the moment it serves to retind us that we are discussing
a system which gradually changes over time on a number of dimensions.
SOme Related Variables In Need
of Further Research

1-The model which is governing the research is shown in Figure IX.
includes input and output variables.

It

.

1.

Process Facilitation

This phase of our work is not much developed. In response to the changed
dynamics in classrooms where teachers are working under schedules of low
rewards and extended wait-times, role relationschange. Certain kinds of
decisions that formerTy belonged exclusively to the teacher shift gradually
to the children. They now face the problem of getting the resources in
their groups available, i.e., getting all the ideas out and evaluated. More
organizational problems and interdependence stresses develop. The presence
of science phenomena that provoke controversy creates a situation which is
We
nearly ideal for teaching children how to maximize group productivity.
driven
enterprise.)
are operating on a model of science as an argument
H. Wiethake has collected data for two years on samples of trained and
untrained children. That work is still in progress but even in this preliminary stage of development, the data from Wiethake's tape recordings in
AAAS-SAPA classrooms suggest a highly facilitative function is being served

by process training. As a part of this stage of research, somc work should
be done concerning direct training of students to take time both to frame
replies and to hear other student. (For example, a preliminary indicator
of the effect of such training is the frequency of interuptions.)
2.

Fate Control

We are postulating a relationship between the factors of wait-time, reward, process facilitation and an outcome variable called "fate control".
Fate control is defined as the belief that events that happen to you or that
may happen to you are in some measure under your own control. Things you
do now have some consequence for how things will be at another point in
time which is not yet reached. To do that kind of believing requires some
view about the nature of the world. A capricious world acts against the
development of that belief. The scientist, for example, cannot tolerate a
totally whimsical world. If the world were capricious, Prediction would be
impossible. When prediction is impossible planning becomes irrelevant.
For very young children the world is essentially whimsical. They do
not see much connection between today's events and those that happened on
some yesterday. To predict tomorrow's events with some kind of confidence
is out of the question. Magic and the gods (the latter may include any
authority figure) govern their world. A modern technological society could
never develop nor could it survive by operating under such a conception.
The conception of a chance, whimsical, potentially uncontrollable world
eventually brings humans to the point of abdication from all attempts to
cope or to change conditions around them. Planning becomes irrelevant since
plans depend on some continuity between events and there is none under the
"craps" model of the world. Think of fate control es a variable whose
value depends on where in a continuum you stand. Suppose there are two kinds
of people in the world, craps shooters and bowlers. The craps shooter lives
totally in the present. If his luck is good he is happy and he feels "blessed".
But the outcome of the game, given that the dice are honest, had nothing to
do with him. When he shakes and rolls his fate rides on the dice. His
future is left entirely to chance.
The bowler, on the other hand, knows that there is some indeterminacy
when he throws the ball but he also knows that according to how he analyzes
the situation and acts, he can increase the probability of a favorable outcome. He can discover ways to improve his score. In fact, when the ball
leaves his hand, in contrast to the situatuion with the craps player, it
cArries a kind of "message" out into the environment from the player. The
boialer stands relatively higher on fate control than does the craps shooter.
He can dream of what might be and then begin to move toward it. But the
craps shooter must live forever with what is. Childrenwho grow up under
the craps model often arrive at the age of work unequipped to operate
effectively as producers or consumers. From the work of Rotter, Lefcourt
and others it appears that two people of comparable intelligence who stand
at different positions on a fate control measure behave differently in
problematical situations. The bowlers are more aggressive about collecting
information and more insistent on exploring solutions than are the craps
players. Bdwlers act as though there is a way out. Craps shooters act as
if there is no way out.

15
-1

It is a matter of some interest, then, to see what in the school
environment contributes to the development of children who believe and
act as though their fates were, at least in some measure, under their own
control. At the moment our speculation can be summed up in the following
way:

In the presence of stimulating science materials, a low incidence of
overt verbal rewards during inquiry sessions, protracted wait-times, and
with some facilitation training, children who are craps shooters can become
bowlers. At least that is an hypothesis worth evaluating.
The pertinence of the low reward schedule to the fate control variable
should be obvious. If the usual classroom sanctioning behavior is both
intense and whimsical, then the situation encouragas craps. If wait-times
are short rather than long, the sense of powerlessnass that marks the craps
shooter will be enhanced. Protracted wait-times, low overt verbal rewards
and process facilitation training encourage development of bowlers. It is
hoped that other researchers will join us in finding ways to operationalize
the fate control variable.
3.

Personality Variable

There has been some suggestion that a personality variable may be
involved in the wait-tim shift. One might postulate that persons scoring
high on a dogmatism scale would tend to exhibit shorter wait-times.

Summary
Figure IX illustrates the set of relationships postulated in this paper.
Three input conditions, wait-time, reward, process facilitation influence
the values of three output conditions, language, logic, fate control. The
changed values of the output conditions, in turn, alter teacher expectations.
As teacher expectations change the input conditions take on new values. So
the system is potentially dynamic. This paper has focused primarily on the
influence of the wait-time variable on nine outcome variables.

16

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"The Minicourse as a Vehicle for Changing Behavior,
Borg, Walter.
The Research Evidence," Fax West Laboratory for Educational
(Borg worked with older
Research and Development, 1969.
students hut found pauses to be below a 3-second criterion.)
Garigliano, L.J. The Relation of Wait-Time to Student Behaviors
Science Curriculum Improvement Study Lessons, Uhpublished
Ed.D. dissertation, Teachers College, Columbia University,
New York, 1972.

"A Stuay of the Questioning Behavior of Teachers
in the Science Curriculum Improvement Study Teaching the
Unit on Material Objects." Unpublished Ed.D. dissertation,
Teachers College, ColuMbla University, New York, 1968.

Kondo Alan K.

Lawlor, Francis X. "The Effects of Verbal Reward on the Behavior
of Children in the Primary Grades at a Cognitive Task Typical
of the New Elementary Science Curricula." Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, Vol. 7, No. 4 1970, pp. 327-340.

Lefcourt, Herbert, "Internal Versus External Control of Reinforcement:
A Review. Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 65, No. 4, pp. 206-220,
1966.

Ogunyemi, Ebenezer 0. "The Effects of Different Sources of Verbalized
Information on Performance at a Science-Related Cognitive Task."
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Teachers College, Columbia
University, 1970.
Parsons, Theodore W. Guided Self-Analysis System for Professional
Development Education Series. 2140 Shattuck Ave., Berkeley,
California, 1971.
Rotter, Julian B. "Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus
External Control of Reinforcement." Psychological Monographs:
General and Applied. Whole No. 609, Vol. 80, No. 1, 1966.
Wiethake, Henry. The Use of Group Dynamics Training to Foster
Verbal Interaction in the Elementary Science Classroom.
Paper presented at the National Science Teacher Association
Annual meeting, Washington, D.C., 1971.

17

17

For descriptions of classroom interaction instruments referred to,
see Volumes A and B of the Classroom Interaction Newsletter
Mirrors for Behavior II: An Anthology of Observation
Instruments, edited by Anita Simon and E. Gil Boyer, Spring,
1970. Published by Research for Better Schools, 1700 Market
Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103.

A cknowledvnent s

Much credit is due to Dr. Francis X. Lawlor
who has taken part in these studies since their
inception. Graduate assistants and classi.00m
teachers wl:o participated must also be credited.
This kind of research is something done with
people, not something done to them.

18

18

APPENDIX A

Some Training Techniques

Certain habituated verbal signals tend to interfere with the
post-student response wait-time (species 2 wait-time ). These
need to be reduced or eliminated.
1.

Mimicry in chich teachers repeat portions of what
students say.

2.

but
Yes
rejection of an idea.
.

.

.

.

.

.

constructions which signal

The command to "think" without providing either a
pause or cues.
Evaluative comments such as "fine," "good," "ok,"
"right" following a student statement.

b.

As teachers move around the room working with groups they tend
to keep up a constant flow of talk. Techniques which seem to
help increase wait-times of both species are the following:
1.

Join the group with no comment at all. This is another
version of wait-time. Become an observer of the phenomena
the children are examining and talking about. Speak when
you are able to make an observation or other statement
about the system.
Join the group at its eye level. Pull up a chair or stoop
down but get down to the head level at which the children
are working. The video-tapes show children turning away
from phenomena to speak to a teacher who is standing. This
disengagement is avoided by "join up" at the common head
level.

3.

If it is necessary to ask a question, try to ',,void asking
etc." Analysis of
one that begins, "Why did you .
tape recordings shows that the probability of getting a
response to a question in this form is considerably less
(approximately 30%) than if the same information was
requested in some other question format.
.

19

.

4.

Lose eye contact. At first children try to mediate their
arguments through the teacher. The flow of discourse
directly from one child to another increases when the
teacher loses eye contact with the speakers.

5.

Make most comments, especially in the early stages of
helping children to work collaboratively, on processes
you observe going on between them. This process
facilitation function need not be served exclusively by
the teacher. The children can learn to provide the same
service to their own work groups.

One of the process facilitation techniques has a close analog with
It has two or three stateskills being taught in the science program.
ments in it, depending on conditions. The speaker says:
"I observe

X."

Where Y is an inference based on the observation X, e.g., "I infer that you are not interested in what be has to say."

"I infer

"I feel

Where X is any statement that he can make
about the group, e.g., "I observe that someone interrupted Gregory every time be spoke."

Z."

Where Z is a statement about how the observa"I feel you are
tion-inference feels to you.
missing some good ideas."

Some simple group skills training for children, seems to encourage
productive discourse.

c.

Support for the change. At about the end of the second or
third week, teachers experimenting with wait-times appear
to go through a period of frustrating indecision. They
cannot decide when to intervene. If they do not receive
encouragement in this interval their mean wait-times tend
4
to dip back to pre-criterion values.

20

05

P

0,

51

Ct

Fi

CI

C1(

;11)i xlbq

1)1

ci

015

ILL'ij

Notel

STR

sot.

0 REA
z

The ":uwrsation",

In this

quisition, pattern, more of the weight of the
moves falls below the, center line and the

over all pattern exh. its more variety.

above and below the line according to

their relative frequency of occurrence

in the usual classroom pattern.

and the students do the responding.

do most of the structuring and soliciting

Teachers

ing and reacting),

(REA), and responding (RSP) are listed

in contrast to the in-

and react, to each othr's statements (respond-

(SOL), structuring (STR) reacting

soliciting

experiments (stulcUring) or they converse

The moves

players.

pattern, both players engale in all of the

Figure II:

kinds of moves. Stuts begin to suggest

it ion"

The heavy line separates the two

The "ing

FILMED FROM BEST AVAILABLE COPY

NNIn TZalt-ti:Te fo,-, thin teaaber exceeds 3 e2o Pori-tion of tremserirt
Ug.i DI 2iñ 7-'eStdCafg';S increvzes as triof.7,,r, the- melfoer of
11C7

801.1cited

t arforeirroiate.

Yesterday we did cv-.7,e

the Wale print pansr ana

UhFtt reaullt,s ca,u yo,;. see by looking at the varioua greuys papars:
and whnt ever- hapmeed?
C.

Ar,y.

yo w. d;..7,ntt want to do it noin

tale All 1z:19.--1.1-0. let the Lb light hit it the drker it got. We
5, 3. Xf it was 3
had digTeFozt tiuie, moat u131'.1d tive was
raintes tbat it wl.w; kept mder, it -marl 5 mialkace that cau
between.
C4

Nell nu one of the tb.ings th

cU (Ina o the 111he throe

go alca:z with
stt-ths of patep Ina tho r010.743:::'r0 dont sectz to
naid Da71:14 incallze the 10, and the th:=.0e are the an:7,e

aud tIle 5 is s
C

t disagr:.,e with

In because Inut nhat Dmrid [aid was well

i7:2;Ider longer dts gabs darke.72.; I support.> agree
wben you hee9
{1f7-n11,-,, afe with you at all,
with Daveyr 1ZriT:1

Ahr In 4h some caaes so-me people ctidzet aotLy know ubat
to do ao Ah thsy eet7id've kTe,de a Akietakeo and rg.yhe put the
i thet, in the Slt? light!, in no ppakz-tt3 -.4e. put them
w2acle 3tL
i7Il

rea.11y tell that much.
aza therafaI'e conld
Well :r. tkark f CI1 :1 peint .A13 theres a tir,,e whtr.zei it gets the
clarl;eatff, between 10 and 5 and then it 2eCri9 1.10 gat light.
boosasie *alum are thingE thrre it does 3.00k 15.tt1e nghtez.

C.

than the five. Va one poj.z-Ltl. rrd ;just go213s1 ncg. but onz.1
in between. that 3D2e7...)ably t-Quid be the daxtezt 0.1..ye6 there and
gets li,glitor.
tilen
derft think It T:Os anyeezed to get dsrker as it was exposed
to lightv beastize we did it wad. when we expose_ it to light
the co1or cam off, but ulifn you put it in watir arad you let
it trz-7 it got darker.
re0_ly all of
Wi, nor.,t of them lcok the wacra from heye.,
tinTraz:, btrh most of thaw:s they' all look pretty

0.

I think it wan bocauue th e. zza lizht too if you hare a dull vz,
light it woule...n't shcw up to nazb and if you .11ZWO it like a :real
bright light it will react. more:, like it'll gt--3;ii a shade that
daz'kere

22

FILMED FROM BEST AVAILABLE COPY

C.

Well, Xth ink

c

T dicsgTec with you hecaoi

-iore time you have it ,Andor the light the
darker the part, tho.t isn't vnder the light get3.
uh it'

the

that i6 in

si

the liat gets
C.

to the
I agree. with ICathy!, becsw4e how could anythiLa
that like just isn"',1 in la light. What
happen to the Ilaxt which :To in the light?

p;=),zt

disagree wit!...; Ne3Lneth t*cause Ah he sai.d. t. the part thc.t
Was hideLen from the light got darker, thf.: paKi; that was In "che
riot le.daen fraithc _ight.
light got darkor

le color that
cause when

Well I don't thin!:: the !ri'rer really afge;e6e1

msoh I think it Wa8 just the lighl= that did
took it out you could zoo the dtfferelce

vady without

putting it 1.11. the vater.

Dia it act auTy drarkcr whola :?-ou put it in

Well

Well

n7lt re11-7,1y.
1711-1iha

It just get2
the water..

C

It

311y is tru:s.

little fetl of the wate l? when
ts4.,s a litUe clearer.

m put it im

... whet, .T.t.Ithy said, mat

thixg thct hap?ned with ours was whf.ultm .;ested ours
heppenea
it didn't Zook like anwti.
mad we took it
to it, and th.en when we p!rit it in tho da2,k mr,3 put a
emd Ieft it over night it ;et =eh
.

darker the neIrt dfiw,.

C

Ni at it.

Like today, whem 14,11

e1I um, sera people walked around ulth the 2 ;rips while
when
they were gettIng ready t experiment. And 1;
thea: put it in tl'.e light t'aey could of a .reee: been a
little darker.
bocarts.i: whenHwe lid
agxce with
7ted ,
c,nd everzr2..ng. M when t.Te
Ac? or it.
white on the other
ours turned tat like,

Weil

1.1.?

And, lam, then v:hen we let;:, It over night it

imed da0r,.

C.

Wall 1 diseuree with John, he said like hefor, the experiment
any difference
if we walked ermad with it, it woulchtvt
if we didn't dip it into water say got paper 4wo brought
An, does :1:t get
it up from the art room inoldr. Wieth4...kes
darker?

et

T diss.,-=ree with Sal because thats dierent kind of
Yes
paper 9a1. And it Eight hve am affect becaut:; we were
keeping it In a hLok and it viv.s dark thero ane, :Is you were
walking around the light could have affeetedii.; and tts not
the s7,77e kInd of 7,)per as the normal papor-uz :3et out of
cur notetscoko so I agree with Jbha.

br

FILMED FROM BEST AVAILABLE COPY

waa 1.

4'

=,k:taka5

vho
"I:4;5'f -0-aex-aw

;.,,Alk3

.:-:ont:5,701nv

FIGURE VI. A typical analysis of a transcript illustrates the high incidence co:
Experime.it: Observing changes in a thermal system.
Wai
STUDENT
S
r.Rea.sol.Rs
.tim
Time
ade
eward Fifth
Itcm Re,)eat
Cl: Ice is melting.
1
The ice is melting. What
T
2
1
do we mean by melting?
Cl,C2:
Getting smaller,
3
T:
Getting
smaller, very good.
1
1
4
C2:
Shrinking
5
Shrinking
T:
6
C2:
The
ice is reducing.
7
The ice is reducing, that's
T:
1
a good word, S, reducing.
1Cl:
And Oater is dripping and
9
15 sec
the ice..(inaudible)
C2:
Oh,
1 know what happens,
10
Well, when the ice is dripping it causes water vapor.
Water vapor, good, that's
2
2
11
very, very good. Water vapor.
what else? You both are looking at the hot bottte, the one
with the warm water in it. What
30 sec
about ...(interrupted)
1
Cl,C2:
Hot
air,
hot
air,
hot
air.
12
Hot
air.
Why
is
there
hot
air?
T:
1
13
Cl: Because there is no space for
14
the new clean air to get in.
1
C2:
No
room for oxygen.
15
For Oxygen, that's right, you
T;
1
1
16
see the hot air here.(Pcints
to A) What about here?(Points
:

to B)

C2: You don't see an

17

TOTALS

9

45 sec

.45 sec of transcript; average wait
time = 0.4 sec.

0

0

0

Students = 10

10 ls

ustrates the high incidence of mimicry and rewarding.
1.7-ma1 system.

TEACHER
Wait
STUDENT
Str.Rea.Sol.Rsp.time S01.Str.Rea.Rsp.

Time

STUDENT
t .Rea.Sol.Rs
Rsp
Rea/Sol

1
1

Rsp

1

Rea/Rea
Rsp
Rea
Rsp
Rea/Rea/
Rea
Rsp

1
1
1
102

1

15 sec

Rsp
ipor .

Rea/Rea/
Rea/Sol/
!Mr/Sol

212

apor.
look-

he one
t. What
30 sec
air.
1

t air?
e for
n.

1

, you
ints

Rsp
Rea/Sol
Rsp

RRsn
Rea/Rea/
Sol/

'ointa
R:

45 sec
.ge wait

0

0

Students = 10

10 lseo

5

2.

Teachers = 21

TOTAL MOVE&

TEACY_ER

1.Str.Rea.

Specie #1

P

TEACHER

A

Specie

TEACHER
-----

P

A
STUDENT

TEACHER
---------

STUDENT

FIGURE 3a.

The location of potential pauses in a sequence of moves. As species
2a and 2b increase in length, the probability of S-S-S-S sequences
increases.

Species #2b
STUDENT

FIGURE 3b.

A

TALK

IN BURSTS

Pauses in the body of student talk. Daring explanations, speech from
a student often is delivered in bursts or clusters separated by
pauses of from two to five or more seconds. (Also see Figure IV.)

INPUT

OUTPUT

IWAIT TIME

LANGUAGE

REWARD

SCIENO
MATERIALS

_1 LOGIC
FATE CONTROL

PROCESS FACILITATION

FIGURE 9. Schema of relations between factors.

27

TEACHER
EXPECTATIONS

1 Second Pause

100

5 seconail

ih this example, equals one second.

60

70

80

90

100

Student Responses

Paper is in calibrations
through the machine. Each interval

FIGURE ru. Servo-Chart plot of discourse
in normal. classrooms.
whose value is determined by how rapidly it is rolled

EIM

90

100

airM10

TEACHER TALK

90

100

FIGURE IV: Wait-time is increased over that shown in
figure III.
The area circled
indicates a pause which does not appear to be one because the machine picked
up the
movement of a chair. One of the, mechanical problems yet to be solved
is to find
a. way to filter out such events.
At the moment they are simply marked on the
graph as they happen.

(Ont. Studtnt)

STUDENT TALK

1111Mit....0

Characteristic
Post-Student
Response
Etraneous
Wait-time
Sound

..

20

Note the long pauses,.
Short wait-times prol,ably Interfere with
the generation: of complete thoughts-

F=RE IV ;:t-udz.nt cOnversation..

=mg
mmom

?ft

REMI

z

IMIP

WIME

mem

100
90

80

% Rhetorical (R)
3
% Informational (I) 82
13
% Leading (L)
2
% Probing (P)

70

TOTAL %

100

Mean number of
questions per 15
min of transcript

38

60
50

40

N= 95 recordings
30

20

10

FIGURE VII. Typical distribution of question types asked by teachers prior to
wait-timd-training.
100
90

80
70

50

40

% Rhetorical (R)
2
% Informational (I) 34
% Leading (L)
36
28
% Probing (P)

TOTAL %

100

Mean number of
questions per 15
min of transcript
N = 84 recordings

30
20

10

FIGURE VIIb. Typical change in distribution of ques ion types once criterion
wait times of three seconds or more are attained and sustained.

Mean frequency
for a 15-min.
sample

1

4

5

6

4.2

3.9

4.2

2

(Pre-criterion)
3.2
3.8
(sec)=1.3

(Tapes made at approx.
3-week intervals)
4.8
Mean wait times
7

FIGURE VIII. Typical shifts in values of three student outcome variables for a
class on a criterion wait-time schedule (Third Grade). A Mean
number of solicitations, structuring, and reacting moVes; Amean
number of evidence-inference statements; 0 mean length of response.

TABLE I. Student outsome variables: Contrasts between Tape 1 and Tape 6 of the
training sequence for 76 out of 95 teachers who achieved criterion wait
times of three seconds or longer prior to tape 6.
STUDENT VARIABLES

TAPE 1

Mean length of response

8

27

(3-12)

(14-39 words)

5

17

(0-17)

(12-28)

7

1

range

Mean number of unsolicited
but appropriate responses
range

Mean number of failures to
respond
range

Number of evidence-inference
statements
range

(1-15)

(0-3)

6

14

(0-11)

(6-21)

Number of solicitation, structuring,
5
and reacting moves
range

TAPE 6

(1-8)

32

(11-48)

15 minutes of tapescript; Tape 1: mean wait time in this sample
was 1.2 sec; range 0.8 - 2.4 sec. Tape 2: mean wait time = 3.3 sec;
eange = 3.0 - 5.6 sec.

